I will have my outer office packed with those
students whose names are in that little box and I
need to see those students face to face
individually and what I do with them then I say let
me see your schedule let me see why you have to have
this course and I try to substitute a course now
this is after Donna Wiseman and Dave Armstrong
have worked with these kids initially so you can
see we have some layers but It gets to the point
where I have to say, I'm sorry, I think that you'll
need to take this course in the fall and try to find a
substitute course because you're not going to be
student teaching until the fall of 89. And isn't
that adding another incredible burden to you
right now, not knowing the outcome of this
decision? I mean, how can you make those decisions
without even knowing what kind of program you're
going to have? We know our present program will be
in place until 1991. And all of our students who
came in in the fall must be graduated by 1991 under
the old, under the present program. If they are
not, they won't be able to be certified. What was I
hearing about, you know, we have to have something
by January because this new thing is going to have
to be implemented in September? We have to have
something in place by January. in order to get it
through the university curriculum committees
and be approved so we can have a new program in place
by September. For the ones that are coming in in 88?
Exactly. Because, you see, they will be the
graduating class of 92. So our department will not
only have the management problems we presently
face, but we are going to be serving two programs at
one time for the next three years. And this will be
just your department, pretty much, won't it? I
mean, it'll affect this one the majority. It'll
affect, for example, educational psychology
would be affected by those service courses that
they have in our program. But our department is the
greatest affected. And we all have dual programs
going on. What has this done to the climate in your
department as far as teacher morale or anxiety or
the unknown? The fear of the unknown, I guess, is
the worst. How do you deal with that as a department
head and manager? How do you manage the people?
Well, that's part of the management problem. I
think that if you're perceived as trying to
maintain a class load that is appropriate. For
example, the time I spend with these kids who need
to get into classes, I do not add a student to a class
except in an emergency, unless a faculty member
has signed a form accepting the student. Now let me
explain that. If you came to me and you said you
wanted to get into a class and it was closed I would
say here is a form and you need to take this to
Professor Alexander and her class is closed and if
she signs her name on this accepting you into that
class then I will admit you so Pat Alexander has
made the decision that she will take that 31st
student into her class then I put that person in now
for those faculty who are too soft-hearted, I
sometimes have to stop and say, you know, even the
form isn't going to do. We simply can't. The
instruction is going to be affected. So that I
think in that way, the faculty understands that
I'm just not sitting here and adding 47 kids to your
class. It's their decision first. And if there's
an emergency, then I may call and say, Pat, we have a
student who's doing student teaching next
semester. Yours is the only class. Is there any
possibility we can get her in? And so I might do a
face-to-face or a telephone conversation with a
faculty member. Then that kind of leads me into all
these changes and all the things that are
happening are going to impact, obviously, the
future and what the College of Education will be in
the 21st century. And I see that you had some notes
in there. Do you have a crystal ball to what you feel
like? I think we've covered most of these. But let
me share with you, first of all, One of the changes
that I feel very positive about in regard to the
institution,
and that is the special effort that is being made
for the recruitment of minorities. And I'm very,
I'm going to be very point about that, I'm very
proud of the fact that we now have in place an
English as a second language teacher preparation
program.
Dean came here in 1980, I came here in 1981. I knew
something about Texas and I knew something about
the makeup of Texas. And so I was quite surprised,
I'd say relatively surprised, that when I came
here we did not have any program in the department
that addressed the needs of the minorities in the
state of Texas.
The first individual that was recruited in this
department was Dr. . And she was recruited to
develop a program in ESL bilingual education. She
has done a superb job in that regard. And she's
another individual. She got the Outstanding New
Faculty Award, and this year she got the Teaching
Award. And do you know that she has submitted 13
proposals in the short time she has been here? And
has a number of those, I think eight of those were
funded. We are now, we have Dr. Gracilia Pena
Rosenberg, who will be coming to us in January to
help us in our bilingual program. We've gotten
that program off the ground. We had very few women
in our department. We now have added women to our
program. We have two black females. And we've
added, I guess what I'm saying is that I feel very
proud of the fact that we are addressing the kinds
of needs that I think Texas has had for a long time in
teacher preparation, and that is role models. And
I think the institution is moving in that
direction. And I'm very pleased with that. We have
a minority mentorship program that we have just
developed for our undergraduate teacher
preparation program. And Dr. Patricia Lark, who
is our minority, and Dr. Donna Wiseman have put
this program together. And what that program
entails is that we have enlisted the help of
minority community leaders in the Bryan College
Station area to help us screen about 30 elementary
education majors into this program. And these
elementary education majors will be serving as
mentors to the same number of elementary students
in Bryan College Station who are in the sixth,
seventh, and eighth grades. They will be These
students have been identified by these community
leaders as having parental support for education
and academic promise. And what we hope will happen
is that our mentors, by working with them, will
help them to achieve academic success in the
sixth, seventh, and eighth grades, which will
build them a foundation for having success in high
school, which will bring them into the university
level. And at the same time, it's going to
sensitize our 30 elementary education majors to
working in a multicultural classroom. I'm very
proud of that program. Would you be willing to
share that model? Because in my new job with this
office in San Antonio, that's what I'm going to be
doing is working with the 6th, 7th, and 8th
graders. And that could be a wonderful launching
thing. And we might be able to expand it. OK. Sure.
Dr. Lahr. OK. Dr. Weitzman. Great. That would be
wonderful. That's one of the things that I'm very
proud of. I think
another area that I'm very proud of, when I came
here, we had one computer and one Diablo printer in
this department.
Wow. Every faculty member now has a computer in his
or her office. Every secretary is computerized,
has a computer. We are on a SIMS, obviously the
SIMS, which the university now has moved to
computerizing their registration and so forth.
We have a laser printer. We have a, our curriculum
and our instructional research lab have
computers in them. What I'm particularly proud of
is that we are on the cutting edge of technology in
this department so that we are going to be moving to
a new configuration in terms of our support staff
and how it will be functioning in relation to our
faculty needs that will bring our technology to
play at the highest level of the state of art. And
we're going to be doing that probably within the
next year. How did you accomplish all this? With
the help of the faculty, with the fact of using our
resources wisely. And that's what I'm saying was a
management type of thing. procedure that we went
through. So I'm kind of proud of that, too. That was
one of the other aspects. And I spoke about
recruitment of minorities. So what do I see for the
21st century? Well, I think I see something not too
dissimilar from some ideas that I put forward. I
had an article that I was invited to write for my
specialty is English education. And an
organization I belong to called Conference on
English Education. And they had two journals that
they devoted to invited articles, and one journal
was on needed research. And they asked me to write
an article in that regard. And one of the things I
said was that I believed that in the very near
future, one of the things that we would be doing in
teacher education is to try to prepare teacher
scholars who are also researchers. In other
words, teacher researchers. And I believe that we
are just on the horizon of doing that at Susannan
University. And it's right in keeping with the
Holmes Group agenda in terms of major research
institutions becoming involved in teacher
education. That's why I'm so proud of that. I'll
take a copy of that article. And I think what's
going to happen is that we're going to have much
more collaboration of our faculty with public
school teachers in the area of classroom research
so that it's out there where it's taking place. And
I think that we're going to find that our whole
thrust will be in producing these teacher
scholars who are also researchers, and that our
faculty are going to build that research base that
our teachers may not have. But the two of them
together, with the practical experience of a
teacher coupled with the research expertise of
our faculty, could do wonders. Just do wonders. I
think I see that on our horizon. So you're not
apprehensive about this new program that is about
to come about? You think that it has a positive? I
mean, everybody's sold. I think we have an
opportunity. I think I'm optimistic about it. And
are you able to project that to your faculty? I
think to some degree. I would be less than honest if
I didn't tell you that there are some faculty that
are reticent about what's happening. They're not
certain that we have proven that one thing is
better than another. My feeling is we could go on
for years and never have proof. We have to move
forward. I think the climate now, the educational
reform is saying, as parents were saying, we
expect our teachers to be fully prepared and to be
scholars. and to be able to not only make a
diagnosis, but be able to make a remediation if
that's necessary. And you can't do that unless you
have a scholar researcher. Do you think, though,
that it's going to affect teacher shortage? I
mean, we already have a teacher shortage, but is
that going to make it worse? In other words,
prevent people from going into teaching because
they feel like it's, you know, five years and then
you come out and you're not making as much as...
That's what I'm hearing from a lot of people. How do
you respond to that? Because I'm having trouble
responding.
I'm going to say this, and I hope it's taken the
right way.
I mentioned earlier about my career being spent in
major research institutions. And I believe Texas
A&M University is such an institution.
And I believe teacher education is part of that
research agenda.
And our role is to produce the educational leaders
of tomorrow.
If it has some effect on the numbers that we are able
to produce, then I say that must be balanced by the
even higher quality of individual we will be
putting out who will go out there and work with
those people who didn't graduate from Texas A&M
University and will lead in education and will be
on the cutting edge of what happens. Now, just
think about what that would mean to this
institution and to education if that were to
occur. Then we become the seed institution for
educational reform for how many years to come? And
that's why I'm optimistic. And I think that would
be exciting for a faculty to begin to work with the
high quality students that we have coming to us and
follow them through into a professional career.
That's my view. That's a very bright outlook. And I
think that should be appreciated. And I hope that
everybody would feel that way, because it is. so
important. And I really appreciate your time and
all of this very good insights because it's a
totally different. No, I really appreciate it.
And I hope that you let me come back and ask a few
questions as I start to synthesize all of it. I know
I'll have to.